{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1348\cocoasubrtf170
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\f0\fs24 \cf0 15 July 2016\
Lit review notes for heat tolerance experiment\
Also has some notes on other tolerance studies (drought etc.)\
\
Last updated: 3 August 2016\
\
See also: heattol_litreview.xlsx or heattol_litreview.csv for the data version of this!\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b\fs28 \cf0 Heat Tolerance\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 GreerWeedon2012 
\b0 (Greer & Weedon 2012)
\b \
Modelling photosynthetic responses to temperature of grapevine (Vitis vinifera cv. Semillon) leaves on vines grown in a hot climate\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Semillon\
Fig 1. Shows temp \'97 10-40 C with big amplitude (20 C) at start of bud break and less at end (5 C)\
Photosynthesis optimal at 36 C.\
No manipulation, just measured in a hot vineyard. \
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Wample1991 (
\b0 Wample, Barry, Burr 1991)
\b \
Heat Tolerance of Dormant Vitis vinifera cuttings\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Took some dormant cuttings from field, exposed them to 50-60 C treatments for up to 30 mins. Recorded % cuttings that grew roots and shoots. Cuttings were taken at various times from the field\'85 \
\
Vars:\
12 December treatment\
Cabernet Sauvignon - no growth after 58 C for 10 mins (but totally fine until then!)\
Merlot - no growth after 60 C for 30 mins; 10% growth after 58 C for 30 mins; but 80% did okay at 56 C for 30 mins\
Chardonnay - 50% growth at 54 C for 30 mins; 20% growth at 58 C for 30 mins\
Chenin blanc - same as Merlot\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Soar2009 
\b0 (Soar et al 2009)
\b \
Irrigated Shiraz vines (Vitis vinifera) upregulate gas exchange and maintain berry growth in response to short spells of high maximum temperature in the field\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Outside warming experiment, but shows that Shiraz is okay up to 45 C (it looks like, see Fig 2a)\
\
Vars:\
Shiraz\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Salazar2010
\b0  (Salazar Parra et al. 2010)
\b \
Effects of climate change scenarios on Tempranillo grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.) ripening: response to a combination of elevated CO2 and temperature, and moderate drought\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Greenhouse experiments on CO2 and temp, looked at grape quality:\
elevated temperature, 28/18\'b0C vs. 24/14\'b0C, day/night\
\
Vars:\
Tempranillo\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Petrie2005
\b0  (Petrie and Clingeleffer 2005)
\b \
Effects of temperature and light (before and after budburst) on inflorescence morphology and flower number of Chardonnay grapevines (Vitis vinifera L.)\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Changed temperature and light with mini-chambers on the bud\
Average temps were 26-40 C before bud burst; 26-38 C after bud burst.\
\
Vars:\
Chardonnay\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Kliewer1968 
\b0 (Kliewer 1968)
\b \
* Excellent paper to review\
Effect of temperature on the composition of grapes grown under field and controlled conditions\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Growth chamber study\
\
3-year old own rooted \'97 growing in 30 gal (!) or 5 gal cans; maintained in a lathhouse \
At veraison vines went into chambers or sunlit vineyard\
\
Adjusted leaf area-fruit ratio before veraison (20 cm2/berry); all lateral shoot growth and shot berries were removed prior to moving the vines\
\
RH was 60-80%; light was 2000-10000 ft-c (avg of 7,000 ft-c) during the day (12 hours)\
15 C at night; 20 C during the day; but looks like they got 20-38 as daily range (see fig. 1) \
Wood shavings were placed around each container to reduce fluctuations in soil temperature. \
\
5 vars but most analysis focuses on the top 2:\
White Riesling\
Petite Sirah\
Cardinal\
Malbec\
Chardonnay\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Greer2010
\b0  (Greer & Weston 2010)
\b \
* Excellent paper to review (see growth measurements especially)\
Heat stress affects flowering, berry growth, sugar accumulation and photosynthesis of Vitis vinifera cv. Semolina grapevines grown in a controlled environment\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 3 year old potted (25 L) vines\
Growth chambers\
40/25 C at flowering, fruit set, veraison and mid-ripening for 4 days\
Control was 25/15 (400 mircomols, 12 hour days)\
\
8-10 shoots developed, 4 were retained, each vine has 5-8 bunches\
\
\'93Shoot length was measured throughout the growth conditions but leaf growth was measured until maximum leaf size was achieved, as indicated by no change in successive measurements\'94\
\
Vars:\
Semillon\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 MartinezL2016
\b0  (Martinez-Luscher et al. 2016)\

\b Sensitivity of Grapevine Phenology to Water Availability, Temperature and CO2 concentration
\b0 \
\
Mix of review and new analysis (of PEP725 data from Croatia) and new data from experiment on warming experiment (I think) it\'92s new.\
\
Vars:\
White Tempranillo\
Red Tempranillo\
\
+++++++++++++++++++++++++\

\b  Based on the literature  \'85.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 +++++++++++++++++++++++++\
\
Happ says 16-22.5 C are ideal temps.\
Shiraz survived up to 45 C; buds survive 38 C \'85\
\
\
+++++++++++++++++++++++++\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 No temperature manipulations\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 +++++++++++++++++++++++++\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Kriedemann1968 
\b0 (Kriedemann 1968)
\b \
Photosynthesis in vine leaves as a function of light intensity, temperature, and leaf age
\b0 . 
\b \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 See nice version of this work in Happ 1999.\
Potted cuttings grown in glasshouse or outdoors, leaves (only I believe) were warmed in cuvette.\
Photosynthesis peaks at 30, crashes 35 (temps up to 43 C).\
\
Vars:\
Sultana\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 GreerWeedon2013 
\b0 (Greer & Weedon 2013)
\b \
The impact of high temperatures on 
\i Vitis vinifera
\i0  cv. Semillon grapevine performance and berry ripening\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Part of vineyard covered to reduce exposure to radiation and heat\
\
Vars:\
Semillon\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 \
GreerWeedon2014 
\b0 (Greer & Weedon 2014)
\b \
Temperature-dependent responses of the berry development process of three grapevine (Vitis vinifera) cultivars\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Vars:\
Chardonnay\
Merlot\
Semillon\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 \
Hulands2013 
\b0 (Hulands, Greer, Harper 2013)
\b \
The Interactive Effects of Temperature and Light Intensity on 
\i Vitis vinifera
\i0  cv. \'91Semillon\'92 Grapevines. I. Berry Growth and Development\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Soluble solids increased after treatments especially in treatments applied in mid and late stage of berry growth.\
\
Vars:\
Semillon\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Hulands2014 
\b0 (Hulands, Greer, Harper 2014)
\b \
The Interactive Effects of Temperature and Light Intensity on 
\i Vitis vinifera
\i0  cv. \'91Semillon\'92 Grapevines. II. Berry Ripening and Susceptibility to Sunburn at Harvest\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Berries exposed to higher temp treatments at later stages of growth had greater susceptibility to sunburn. \
\
Mid and late stage heat treatments also negatively affected berry diameter at harvest.\
\
Vars:\
Semillon\
\
\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b\fs28 \cf0 Other Related\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0\fs24 \cf0 \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Mikoczy2008\
Effect of drought damage on vine varieties\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Drought field paper.\
Vars:\
Chardonnay\
Kiralyleanyka\
Pinot Noir\
Kekfrankos\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 McIntyre, Kliewer, Lider 1987\
Some limitation of the degree day system used in viticulture in California\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0 \cf0 Reviews degree day stuff for five grape vars in California. \
\
\'93The average and range in dates of budbreak, bloom, and fruit maturity of five grape cultivars grown in five different climatic regions of California were determined over a period of two to six years. For each cultivar and climatic region, a comparison of the variation in the average number of degree days and duration (in days) for three developmental periods (budbreak to bloom, bloom to fruit maturity (20\'b0Brix), and budbreak to fruit maturity) was made.\'94\
\
Vars:\
W Riesling\
P Sirah\
Cardinal\
Malbec\
Chardonnay\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b \cf0 Schnabel1987
\b0  (Schnabel & Wample 1987)
\b \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sa240

\fs26 \cf0 Dormancy and Cold Hardiness in Vitis vinifera L. cv. White Riesling as Influenced by Photoperiod and Temperature \
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardeftab720\ri720

\b0\fs24 \cf0 Field grown potted plants were the comparison\
\
Vars:\
W Riesling}